# Operation summary uses sentence casing

Authors:
- [`@TaylorKrusen`](https://github.com/TaylorKrusen) Taylor Krusen (Redocly) 

## What this does and why

**What** -- this rule enforces a consistent pattern of capitalization on Operation summaries.  

**Why** -- "Sentence casing vs title casing" may be the "tabs vs spaces" of the writing world, but being _consistent_ is often more important than being right. At Redocly, we prefer sentence casing for Operation summaries. By adding this configurable rule to our linter, we ensure our entire team writes them that way.

## Code

Here's how the configurable rule looks in the `redocly.yaml` file:

```yaml
rules:  
  rule/operation-summary-sentence-case:
    subject: 
      type: Operation
      property: summary
    message: "Operation summary must be sentence cased."
    assertions: 
      pattern: /^[A-Z]+[^A-Z]+$/
```

> [!NOTE]
This rule can be repurposed for other fields with a single sentence, but not multiple sentences.

### Rule explanation

This rule asserts that each Operation `summary` matches the regex defined in `pattern`. The regex we defined matches strings that:
1. Start with an uppercase letter
2. Are followed by 1+ characters that are _not_ uppercase letters
3. End with a character that is _not_ an uppercase letter
  
**Tip**: Building a regex for your own rule? A tool like [regexr](https://regexr.com/) can be quite useful.

## Examples

Summaries _with_ sentence casing (correct):

```yaml
  /zoo-tickets: 
    post:
      summary: Buy zoo tickets
  /zoo-ticket/{ticketId}:    
    get:
      summary: Get zoo ticket
```

Summaries _without_ sentence casing (incorrect):

```yaml
  /zoo-tickets: 
    post:
      summary: Buy Zoo tickets
  /zoo-ticket/{ticketId}:    
    get:
      summary: get Zoo ticket
```

## Excluding operations from the rule

Sometimes you might need an exception to the rule. For example, your Operation summary could have a proper noun or an acronym. You can do that using an [ignore file](https://redocly.com/docs/cli/commands/lint/).

### Example - ignoring sentence casing

Pretend you have the following Operation and want to keep "QR" capitalized in the summary:
```yaml
  /tickets/{ticketId}/qr:
    get: 
      summary: Get ticket QR code
```

1. Verify your sentence casing rule is working correctly
  - Run `npx @redocly/cli lint`
  - Console should show error on Operation summary

The linting output from our example:

```bash
Operation summary must be sentence cased.

218 | /tickets/{ticketId}/qr:
219 |   get: 
220 |     summary: Get ticket QR code
221 |     description: Return an image of your ticket with scannable QR code. Used for event entry. 
222 |     operationId: getTicketCode

Error was generated by the rule/operation-summary-sentence-case rule.
```

2. Generate an ignore file
  - Run `npx @redocly/cli lint --generate-ignore-file`
  - Console should confirm an ignore file was generated
  - A *.redocly.lint-ignore.yaml* was added to your code

The ignore file generated by our example:

```yaml
# .redocly.lint-ignore.yaml
openapi.yaml:
  rule/operation-summary-sentence-case:
    - '#/paths/~1tickets~1{ticketId}~1qr/get/summary'
```

3. Run the linter and verify your Operation summary is ignored
  - Run `npx @redocly/cli lint`
  - Console output should confirm valid OpenAPI description

The linting output from our example with ignore file added:

```bash
Woohoo! Your API description is valid. 🎉
1 problem is explicitly ignored.
```